



Network Working Group                                      A. Clemm, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                               C. Westphal
Intended status: Informational                                 Futurewei
Expires: 2 July 2024                                         J. Tantsura
                                                                  Nvidia
                                                            L. Ciavaglia
                                                                   Nokia
                                                       C. Pignataro, Ed.
                                                     NC State University
                                                              M-P. Odini
                                                        30 December 2023


    Challenges and Opportunities in Management for Green Networking
                      draft-irtf-nmrg-green-ps-03

Abstract

   Reducing humankind's environmental footprint and making technology
   more sustainable are among the biggest challenges of our age.
   Networks play an important part in this challenge.  On one hand, they
   enable applications that help to reduce this footprint.  On the other
   hand, they contribute to this footprint themselves in no
   insignificant way.  Methods to make networking technology itself
   "greener" and to manage and operate networks in ways that reduces
   their environmental footprint without impacting their utility
   therefore need to be explored.  This document outlines a
   corresponding set of opportunities, along with associated research
   challenges, for networking technology in general and management
   technology in particular to become "greener", i.e., more sustainable,
   with reduced greenhouse gas emissions and less negative impact on the
   environment.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   This Internet-Draft will expire on 2 July 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  Approaching the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     1.3.  Structuring the Problem Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   2.  Definitions and Acronyms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   3.  Network Energy Consumption Characteristics and
           Implications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.  Challenges and Opportunities - Equipment Level  . . . . . . .  12
     4.1.  Hardware and Manufacturing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.2.  Visibility and Instrumentation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   5.  Challenges and Opportunities - Protocol Level . . . . . . . .  15
     5.1.  Protocol Enablers for Carbon Optimization Mechanisms  . .  15
     5.2.  Protocol Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     5.3.  Data Volume Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     5.4.  Network Addressing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   6.  Challenges and Opportunities - Network Level  . . . . . . . .  20
     6.1.  Network Optimization and Energy/Carbon/Pollution-Aware
           Networking  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     6.2.  Assessing Carbon Footprint and Network-Level
           Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     6.3.  Dimensioning and Peak Shaving . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     6.4.  Convergence Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     6.5.  The Role of Topology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   7.  Challenges and Opportunities - Architecture Level . . . . . .  25
   8.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   11. Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   12. Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   13. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Motivation

   Climate change and the need to curb greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
   have been recognized by the United Nations and by most governments as
   one of the big challenges of our time.  As a result, curbing those
   emissions is becoming of increasing importance for society and for
   many industries.  The networking industry is no exception.

   The science behind greenhouse gas emissions and their relationship
   with climate change is complex.  However, there is overwhelming
   scientific consensus pointing towards a clear correlation between
   climate change and a rising amount of greenhouse gases in the
   atmosphere.  One greenhouse gas of particular concern, but by no
   means the only one, is carbon dioxide (CO2).  Carbon dioxide is
   emitted in the process of burning fuels to generate energy that is
   used, for example, to power electrical devices such as networking
   equipment.  Notable here is the use of fossil fuels, such as oil,
   which releases CO2 that had long been removed from the earth's
   atmosphere, as opposed to the use of renewable or sustainable fuels
   that do not "add" to the amount of carbon in the atmosphere.

   Greenhouse gas emissions are in turn correlated with the need to
   power technology, including networks.  Reducing those emissions can
   be achieved by reducing the amount of fossil fuels needed to generate
   the energy that is needed to power those networks.  This can be
   achieved by improving the energy mix to include increasing amounts of
   renewable (and hence sustainable) energy sources such as wind or
   solar.  It can also be achieved by increasing energy savings and
   improving energy efficiency so that the same outcomes can be achieved
   while consuming less energy in the first place.

   The amount of CO2 that is emitted in burning fossil fuels to generate
   energy is also referred to as carbon footprint.  Reducing this
   footprint to net-zero is hence a major sustainability goal.  However,
   sustainability encompasses also other factors beyond carbon, such as
   sustainable use of other natural resources, the preservation of
   natural habitats and biodiversity, and the avoidance of any form of
   pollution.









Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   In the context of this document, we refer to networking technology
   that helps to improve its own networking sustainability as "green".
   Green, in that sense, includes technology that helps to lower
   networking's greenhouse gas emissions including carbon footprint,
   which turn includes technology that helps to increase efficiency and
   realize energy savings as well as facilitating managing networks
   towards stronger use of renewables.

   Arguably, networks can already be considered a "green" technology in
   that networks enable many applications that allow users and whole
   industries to save energy and become more sustainable in a
   significant way.  For example, it allows (at least to an extent) to
   replace travel with teleconferencing; it enables many employees to
   work from home and "telecommute," thus reducing the need for actual
   commute; IoT applications that facilitate automated monitoring and
   control from remote sites help make agriculture more sustainable by
   minimizing the application of resources such as water and fertilizer;
   networked smart buildings allow for greater energy optimization and
   sparser use of lighting and HVAC (heating, ventilation, air
   conditioning) than their non-networked not-so-smart counterparts.

   The IETF has recently initiated a reflection on the energy cost of
   hosting meetings three times a year (see for instance [IETF-Net0]).
   It conducted a study of the carbon emissions of a typical meeting and
   found out that 99% of the emissions were due to the air travel.  In
   the same vein, [Framework] compared an in-person with a virtual
   meeting and found a reduction in energy of 66% for a virtual meeting.
   These findings confirm that networking technology can reduce
   emissions when acting as virtual substitution for physical events.

   That said, networks themselves consume significant amounts of energy.
   Therefore, the networking industry has an important role to play in
   meeting sustainability goals not just by enabling others to reduce
   their reliance on energy, but by also reducing its own.  Future
   networking advances will increasingly need to focus on becoming more
   energy-efficient and reducing carbon footprint, both for economic
   reasons and for reasons of corporate responsibility.  This shift has
   already begun, and sustainability is already becoming an important
   concern for network providers.  In some cases such as in the context
   of networked data centers, the ability to procure enough energy
   becomes a bottleneck prohibiting further growth and greater
   sustainability thus becomes a business necessity.

   For example, in its annual report, Telefónica reports that in 2021,
   its network's energy consumption per PB of data amounted to 54MWh
   [Telefonica2021].  This rate has been dramatically decreasing (a
   seven-fold factor over six years) although gains in efficiency are
   being offset by simultaneous growth in data volume.  In the same



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   report, it is stated as an important corporate goal to continue on
   that trajectory and aggressively reduce overall carbon emissions
   further.

1.2.  Approaching the Problem

   An often considered gain in networking sustainability can be made
   with regards to improving the efficiency with which networks utilize
   power during their use phase, reducing the amount of energy that is
   required to provide communication services.  However, for a holistic
   approach other aspects need to be considered as well.

   Environmental footprint is determined not by power consumption alone.
   The sustainability of power sources needs to be taken into account as
   well.  A deployment that includes devices that are less energy-
   efficient but that are powered by a sustainable energy source can
   arguably be considered "greener" than a deployment that includes
   highly efficient device that are powered by Diesel generators.  In
   fact, in the same Telefónica report mentioned earlier, extensive
   reliance on renewable energy sources is emphasized.

   Similarly, deployments can take other environmental factors into
   account that affect carbon footprint.  For example, deployments in
   which factors such as the need for cooling are reduced, or where
   excessive heat that is generated by equipment can be put to
   productive use, will be considered greener than deployments where
   this is not the case.  Examples include deployments in cooler natural
   surroundings (e.g., in colder climates) where that is an option.
   Likewise, manufacturing and recycling of networking equipment are
   also part of the sustainability equation, as the production itself
   consumes energy and results in a carbon cost embedded as part of the
   device itself.  Extending the lifetime of equipment may in many cases
   be preferable over replacing it earlier with equipment that is
   slightly more energy-efficient but that requires the embedded carbon
   cost to be amortized over a much shorter period of time.

   Management has an outsized role to play in approaching those
   problems.  To reduce the amount of energy used, network providers
   need to maximize ways in which they make use of scarce resources and
   eliminate use of resources which are not needed.  They need to
   optimize the way in which networks are deployed, which resources are
   placed where, how equipment lifecycles and upgrades are being managed
   - all of which constitute classic operational problems.  As best
   practices, methods, and algorithms are developed, they need to be
   automated to the greatest extent possible and migrated over time into
   the network and performed on increasingly short time scales,
   transcending management and control planes.




Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


1.3.  Structuring the Problem Space

   From a technical perspective, multiple vectors along which networks
   can be made "greener" should be considered:

   *  Equipment level:

      Perhaps the most promising vector for improving networking
      sustainability concerns the network equipment itself.  At the most
      fundamental level, networks (even softwarized ones) involve
      appliances, i.e., equipment that relies on electrical power to
      perform its function.  There are two distinct layers with
      different opportunities for improvement:

      -  Hardware: Reducing embedded carbon during material extration
         and manufacturing, improving energy and power efficiency during
         operations, and reuse, repurpose, and recycle motions.

      -  Software: Improving sofware energy efficiency, maximizing
         utilization of processing devices, allowing for software to
         interact with hardware to improve sustainability.

      Beyond making network appliances merely more energy-efficient,
      there are other important ways in which equipment can help
      networks become greener.  This includes aspects such as support
      for port power saving modes or downspeeding of links to reduce
      power consumption for resources that are not fully utilized.  To
      fully tap into the potential of such features requires
      accompanying management functionality, for example in order to
      determine when it is "safe" to downspeed a link or enter a power
      saving mode, and manage the network in such a way that conditions
      to do so are maximized.

      Most importantly from a management perspective, improving
      sustainability at the equipment level involves providing
      management instrumentation that allows to precisely monitor and
      manage power usage and doing so at different levels of
      granularity, for example accounting separately for the
      contributions of CPU, memory, and different ports.  This enables
      (for example) controller applications to optimize energy usage
      across the network and that leverage control loops to assess the
      effectiveness (e.g. in terms of reduction in power use) of
      measures that are taken.

      As a side note, the terms "device" and "equipment", as used in the
      context of this draft, are used to refer to networking equipment.
      We are not taking into consideration end-user devices and
      endpoints such as mobile phones or computing equipment.



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   *  Protocol level:

      Energy-efficiency and greenness are aspects that are rarely
      considered when designing network protocols.  This suggests that
      there may be plenty of untapped potential.  Some aspects involve
      designing protocols in ways that reduce the need for redundant or
      wasteful transmission of data to allow not only for better network
      utilization, but greater goodput per unit of energy being
      consumed.  Techniques might include approaches that reduce the
      "header tax" incurred by payloads as well as methods resulting in
      the reduction of wasteful retransmissions.  Similarly, there may
      be cases where chattiness of protocols may be preventing equipment
      from going into sleep mode.  Designing protocols that reduce
      chattiness in such scenarios, for example, that reduce dependence
      on periodic updates or heartbeats, may result in greener outcomes.
      Likewise, aspects such as restructuring addresses in ways that
      allow to minimize the size of lookup tables and associated memory
      sizes and their energy use can play a role as well.

      Another role of protocols concerns the enabling of management
      functionality to improve energy efficiency at the network level,
      such as discovery protocols that allow for quick adaptation to
      network components being taken dynamically into and out of service
      depending on network conditions, as well as protocols that can
      assist with functions such as the collection of energy telemetry
      data from the network.

   *  Network level

      Perhaps the greatest opportunities to realize power savings exist
      at the level of the network as whole.  Many of these opportunities
      are directly related to management functionaliy.  For example,
      optimizing energy efficiency may involve directing traffic in such
      a way that it allows for isolation of equipment that may at the
      moment not be needed so that it can be powered down or brought
      into power-saving mode.  By the same token, traffic should be
      directed in a way that requires bringing additional equipment
      online or out of power-saving mode in cases where alternative
      traffic paths are available for which the incremental energy cost
      would amount to zero.  Likewise, some networking devices may be
      rated less "green" and more power-intensive than others or powered
      by less-sustainable energy sources.  Their use might be avoided
      unless during periods of peak capacity demands.  Generally,
      incremental carbon emissions can be viewed as a cost metric that
      networks should strive to minimize and consider as part of routing
      and of network path optimization.





Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   *  Architecture level

      The current network architecture supports a wide range of
      applications, but does not take into account energy efficiency as
      one of its design parameters.  One can argue that the most energy
      efficient shift of the last two decades has been the deployment of
      Content Delivery Network overlays: while these were set up to
      reduce latency and minimize bandwidth consumption, from a network
      perspective, retrieving the content from a local cache is also
      much greener.  What other architectural shifts can produce energy
      consumption reduction?

   We believe that network standardization organizations in general, and
   IETF in particular, can make important contributions to each of these
   vectors.  In this document, we will therefore explore each of those
   vectors in further detail and for each point out specific challenges
   for IETF.  As our starting point, we borrow some material from a
   prior paper, [GreenNet22].  For this document, this material has been
   both expanded (for example, in terms of some of the opportunities)
   and pruned (for example, in terms of background on prior scholarly
   work).  In addition, this document focuses on and attempts to
   articulate specific challenges relating to work that could be
   championed by the IETF to make a difference.

2.  Definitions and Acronyms

   Below you find acronyms used in this draft:

   Carbon Footprint:
          As used in this document, the amount of carbon emissions
          associated with the use or deployment of technology, usually
          correlated with the amount of energy consumption

   CDN:   Content Delivery Network

   CPU:   Central Processing Unit, that is the main processor in a
          server

   DC:    Data Center

   FCT:   Flow Completion Time

   GHG:   Greenhouse Gas

   GPU:   Graphical Processing Unit

   HVAC:  Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning




Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   ICN:   Information Centric Network

   IGP:   Interior Gateway Protocol

   IoT:   Internet of Things

   IPU:   Infrastructure Processing Units

   LEED:  Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design, a green
          building rating system

   LEO:   Low Earth Orbit

   LPM:   Longest Prefix Match, a method to look up prefixes in a
          forwarding element

   MPLS:  Multi-Path Label Switchin

   MTU:   Maximum Transmission Unit, the largest packet size that can be
          transmitted over a network

   NIC:   Network Interface Card

   QoS, QoE:  Quality of Service, Quality of Experience

   QUIC:  Quick UDP Internet Connections

   SNIC:  Smart NIC

   SDN:   Software-Defined Networking

   TCP:   Transport Control Protocol

   TE:    Traffic Engineering

   TPU:   Tensor Processing Unit

   WAN:   Wide Area Network

3.  Network Energy Consumption Characteristics and Implications

   Carbon footprint and, with it, greenhouse gas emissions are
   determined by a number of factors.  A main factor is network energy
   consumption, as the energy consumed can be considered a proxy for the
   burning of fuels required for corresponding power generation.
   Network energy consumption by itself does not tell the whole story,
   as it does not take the sustainability of energy sources and energy
   mix into account.  Likewise, there are other factors such as hidden



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   carbon cost reflecting the carbon footprint expended in manufacturing
   of networking hardware.  Nonetheless, network energy consumption is
   an excellent predictor for carbon footprint and its reduction key to
   sustainable solutions.  Exploring possibilities to improve energy
   efficiency is hence a key factor for greener, more sustainable, less
   carbon-intensive networks.

   For this, it is important to understand some of the characteristics
   of power consumption by networks and which aspects contribute the
   most.  This helps to identify where the greatest potential not just
   for power savings but also for sustainability improvements lies.

   Power is ultimately drawn by devices.  Devices are not monoliths but
   are composed of multiple components.  The power consumption of the
   device can be divided into the consumption of the core device - the
   backplane and CPU, if you will - as well as additional consumption
   incurred per port and line card.  In addition, GPU and TPU may be
   used as well in the network and may have different power consumption
   profiles.  Furthermore, it is important to understand the difference
   between power consumption when a resource is idling versus when it is
   under load.  This helps to understand the incremental cost of
   additional transmission versus the initial cost of transmission.

   In typical networking devices, only roughly half of the energy
   consumption is associated with the data plane [Bolla2011energy].  An
   idle base system typically consumes more than half of the power over
   the same system running at full load [Chabarek08], [Cervero19].
   Generally, the cost of sending the first bit is very high, as it
   requires powering up a device, port, etc.  The incremental cost of
   transmission of additional bits (beyond the first) is many orders of
   magnitude lower.  Likewise, the incremental cost of incremental CPU
   and memory needed to process additional packets becomes fairly
   negligible.

   This means that a device's power consumption does not increase
   linearly with the volume of forwarded traffic.  Instead, it resembles
   more of a step function in which power consumption stays roughly the
   same up to a certain volume of traffic, followed by a sudden jump
   when additional resources need to be procured to support a higher
   volume of traffic.

   By the same token, generally speaking it is more energy-efficient to
   transmit a large volume of data in one burst (and subsequently
   turning off or downspeeding the interface when idling), instead of
   continuously transmitting at a lower rate.  In that sense it can be
   the duration of the transmission that dominates the energy
   consumption, not the actual data rate.




Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   The implications on green networking from an energy-savings
   standpoint are significant.  Of utmost importance are schemes that
   allow for "peak shaving": networks are typically dimensioned for
   periods of peak demand and usage, yet any excess capacity during
   periods of non-peak usage does not result in corresponding energy
   savings.  Peak shaving techniques that allow to reduce peak traffic
   spikes and thus waste during non-peak periods may result in outsize
   sustainability gains.  Peak shaving could be accomplished by
   techniques such as spreading spikes out over geographies (e.g.
   routing traffic across more costly but less utilized routes) or over
   time (e.g. postponing and buffering non-urgent traffic).

   Likewise, large gains can be made whenever network resources can
   effectively be taken offline for at least some of the time, managing
   networks in a way that enables resources to be removed from service
   so they can be powered down (or put into a more energy-saving state,
   such as when downspeeding ports) while not needed.  Of course, any
   such methods need to take into account the overhead of taking
   resources offline and bringing them back online.  This typically
   takes some amount of time, requiring accurate predictive capabilities
   to avoid situations in which network resources are not available at
   times when they would be needed.  In addition, there is additional
   overhead such as synchronization of state to be accounted for.

   At the same time, any non-idle resources should be utilized to the
   greatest extent possible as the incremental energy cost is
   negligible.  Of course, this needs to occur while still taking other
   operational goals into consideration, such as protection against
   failures (allowing for readily available redundancy and spare
   capacity in case of failure) and load balancing (for increased
   operational robustness).  As data transmission needs tend to
   fluctuate wildly and occur in bursts, any optimization schemes need
   to be highly adaptable and allow for control loops at very fast time
   scales.

   Similarly, for applications where this is possible, it may be
   desirable to replace continuous traffic at low data rates with
   traffic that is sent in burst at high data rates, in order to
   potentially maximize the time during which resources can be idled.

   As a result, emphasis needs to be given to technology that allows for
   example to (at the device level) exercise very efficient and rapid
   discovery, monitoring, and control of networking resources so that
   they can be dynamically be taken offline or back into service,
   without (at the network level) requiring extensive convergence of
   state across the network or recalculation of routes and other
   optimization problems, and (at the network equipment level) support
   rapid power cycle and initialization schemes.  There may be some



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   lessons that can be applied here from IoT, which has long had to
   contend with power-constrained end devices that need to spend much of
   their time in power saving states to conserve battery.

4.  Challenges and Opportunities - Equipment Level

   We are categorizing challenges and opportunities to improve
   sustainability at the network equipment level along the following
   lines:

   *  Hardware and manufacturing.  Related opportunities are arguably
      among the most obvious and perhaps "largest".  However, solutions
      here may lie largely outside IETF's scope.

   *  Visibility and instrumentation.  Instrumenting equipment to
      provide visibility into how they consume energy is key to
      management solutions and control loops to facilitate optimization
      schemes.

4.1.  Hardware and Manufacturing

   Perhaps the most obvious opportunities to make networking technology
   more energy efficient exist at the equipment level.  After all,
   networking involves physical equipment to receive and transmit data.
   Making such equipment more power efficient, have it dissipate less
   heat to consume less energy and reduce the need for cooling, making
   it eco-friendly to deploy, sourcing sustainable materials and
   facilitating recycling of equipment at the end of its lifecycle all
   contribute to making networks greener.  More specific and unique to
   networking are schemes to reduce energy usage of transmission
   technology from wireless (antennas) to optical (lasers).

   One critical aspect of the energy cost of networking is the cost to
   manufacture and deploy the networking equipment.  In addition, even
   the development process itself comes with its own carbon footprint.
   This is outside of the scope of this document: we only consider the
   energy cost of running the network, as this is where the IETF can
   play a role.  However, a holistic approach would include into this
   the embedded energy that is included in the networking equipment.
   One aspect for the IETF may be to consider impact of deploying new
   protocols on the rate of obsolescence of the equipment.  For
   instance, incremental approaches that do not require to replace
   equipment right away - or even extend the lifetime of deployed
   equipment - would have a lower energy footprint.  This is one
   important benefit also of technologies such as Software-Defined
   Networking and Network Function Virtualization, as they may allow
   support of new networking features through software updates without
   requiring hardware replacements.



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   An attempt to compute not only the energy of running a network, but
   also the energy embedded into manufacturing the equipment is
   described in [Emergy] . This is denoted by "emergy", a portmanteau
   for embedded energy.  Likewise, an approach to recycling equipment
   and a proof of concept using old cell phones recycled into a
   "junkyard" data center are described in [Junkyard].

   One trade-off to consider at this level is the selection of a
   platform that can be hardware-optimized for energy efficiency vs a
   platform that is versatile and can run multiple functions.  For
   instance, a switch could run on an efficient hardware platform, or
   run as a software module (container) over some multi-purpose
   platform.  While the first one is operationally more energy
   efficient, it may have a higher embedded energy from a smaller scale,
   less efficient production process, as well as a shorter shelf life
   once new functions need to be added to the platform.

4.2.  Visibility and Instrumentation

   Beyond "first-order" opportunities as outlined in the previous
   subsection, network equipment just as importantly plays an important
   role to enable and support green networking at other levels.  Of
   prime importance is the equipment's ability to provide visibility to
   management and control plane into its current energy usage.  Such
   visibility enables control loops for energy optimization schemes,
   allowing applications to obtain feedback regarding the energy
   implications of their actions, from setting up paths across the
   network that require the least incremental amount of energy to
   quantifying metrics related to energy cost used to optimize
   forwarding decisions.  Absent an actual measurement of energy usage
   (and until such measurement is put in place), the network equipment
   could advertise some proxy of its power consumption (say, a labelling
   scheme as silver, gold, platinum similar to the LEED sustainability
   metric in building codes or the Energy Star label in home appliances;
   or a description of the type of the device as using CPU vs GPU vs TPU
   processors with different power profiles).

   One prerequisite to such schemes is to have proper instrumentation in
   place that allows to monitor current power consumption at the level
   of networking devices as a whole, line cards, and individual ports.
   Such instrumentation should also allow to assess the energy
   efficiency and carbon footprint of the device as a whole.  In
   addition, it will be desirable to relate this power consumption to
   data rates as well as to current traffic, for example, to indicate
   current energy consumption relative to interface speeds, as well as
   for incremental energy consumption that is expected for incremental
   traffic (to aid control schemes that aim to "shave" power off current
   services or to minimize the incremental use of power for additional



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   traffic).  This is an area where the current state of the art is
   sorely lacking and standardization lags behind.  For example, as of
   today, standardized YANG data models [RFC7950] for network energy
   consumption that can be used in conjunction with management and
   control protocols have yet to be defined.

   To remedy this situation, an effort to define sets of green
   networking metrics is currently under way
   [I-D.cx-opsawg-green-metrics].  An agreed set of such metrics will
   provide the basis for further steps such as the implementation of
   corresponding data models as part of management and control
   instrumentation.

   Instrumentation should also take into account the possibility of
   virtualization, introducing layers of indirection to assess the
   actual energy usage.  For example, virtualized networking functions
   could be hosted on containers or virtual machines which are hosted on
   a CPU in a data center instead of a regular network appliance such as
   a router or a switch, leading to very different power consumption
   characteristics.  For example, a data center CPU could be more power
   efficient and consume power more proportionally to actual CPU load.
   Instrumentation needs to reflect these facts and facilitate
   attributing power consumption in a correct manner.

   Beyond monitoring and providing visibility into power consumption,
   control knobs are needed to configure energy saving policies.  For
   instance, power saving modes are common in endpoints (such as mobile
   phones or notebook computers) but sorely lacking in networking
   equipment.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances:

   *  Basic equipment categorization as "energy-efficient" (or not) as a
      first step to identify immediate potential improvements, akin to
      the EnergyStar program from the US's Environmental Protection
      Agency.

   *  Equipment instrumentation advances for improved energy-awareness;
      definition and standardization of granular management information.

   *  Virtualized energy and carbon metrics and assessment of their
      effectiveness in solutions that optimize carbon footprint also in
      virtualized environments (including SDN, network slicing, network
      function virtualization, etc.).






Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   *  Certification and compliance assessment methods that ensure that
      green instrumentation cannot be manipulated to give false and
      misleading data.

   *  Methods that allow to account for energy mix powering equipment,
      to facilitate solutions that optimize carbon footprint and
      minimize pollution beyond mere energy efficiency [Hossain2019].

5.  Challenges and Opportunities - Protocol Level

   There are several opportunities to improve network sustainability at
   the protocol level.  We characterize them along several categories.
   The first and arguably most impactful category concerns protocols
   that enable carbon footprint optimization schemes at the network
   level and management towards those goals.  Other categories concern
   protocols designed to optimize data transmission rates under energy
   considerations, protocols designed to reduce the volume of data to be
   transmitted, and protocl aspects related to network addressing
   schemes.  While those categories may be less impactful, even areas
   with smaller gains should not be left unexplored.

   There is also substantial work in the area of IoT, which has had to
   contend with energy-constrained devices for a long time.  Much of
   that work was motivated not by sustainability concerns but practical
   concerns such as battery life.  However, many aspects appear to also
   apply in the context of sustainability, such as reducing chattiness
   to allow IoT equipment to go into low-power mode.  Accordingly, there
   is opportunity to extend IoT work to more generalized scenarios.  The
   use of power-constrained protocols into the wider Internet happens
   regularly.  For instance, ARM-based chipsets initially designed for
   energy-efficiency in battery-operated mobile devices have been
   embraced in data centers for a similar trajectory.

5.1.  Protocol Enablers for Carbon Optimization Mechanisms

   As will be discussed in Section 6, energy-aware and pollution-aware
   schemes can help improve network sustainability but require awareness
   of related data.  To facilitate such schemes, protocols are needed
   that are able to discover what links are available along with their
   energy efficiency.  For instance, links may be turned off in order to
   save energy and turned back on based upon the elasticity of the
   demand.  Protocols should be devised to discover when this happens,
   and to have a view of the topology that is consistent with frequent
   topology updates due to power cycling of the network resources.

   Also, protocols are required to quickly converge onto an energy-
   efficient path once a new topology is created by turning links on/
   off.  Current routing protocols may provide for fast recovery in the



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   case of failure.  However, failures are hopefully relatively rare
   events, while we expect an energy efficient network to aggressively
   try to turn off links.

   Some mechanism is needed to present to the management layer a view of
   the network that identifies opportunities to turn resources off
   (routers/links) while still providing an acceptable level of Quality
   of Experience (QoE) to the users.  This gets more complex as the
   level of QoE shifts from the current Best Effort delivery model to
   more sophisticated mechanisms with, for instance, latency, bandwidth
   or reliability guarantees.

   Similarly, schemes might be devised in which links across paths with
   a favorable energy mix are preferred over other paths.  This implies
   that the discovery of topology should be able support corresponding
   parameters.  More generally speaking, any mechanism that provides
   applications with network visibility is a candidate for
   scrutinization as to whether it should be extended to provide support
   for sustainability-related parameters.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances:

   *  Protocol advances to enable rapidly taking down, bring back
      online, and discover availability and power saving status of
      networking resources while minimizing the need for reconvergence
      and propagation of state.

   *  Assess which protocols could be extended with energy- and
      sustainability-related parameters in ways that would enable
      "greener" networking solutions, and exploring those solutions.

5.2.  Protocol Optimization

   The second category involves designing protocols in such a way that
   the rate of transmission is chosen to maximize energy efficiency.
   For example, Traffic Engineering (TE) can be manipulated to impact
   the rate adaptation mechanism [Ren2018jordan].  By choosing where to
   send the traffic, TE can artificially congest links so as to trigger
   rate adaptation and therefore reduce the total amount of traffic.
   Most TE systems attempt to minimize Maximal Link Utilization (MLU)
   but energy saving mechanisms could decide to do the opposite
   (maximize minimal link utilization) and attempt to turn off some
   resources to save power.

   Another example is to set up the proper rate of transmission to
   minimize the flow completion time (FCT) so as to enable opportunities
   to turn off links.  In a wireless context, [TradeOff] studies how



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   setting the proper initial value for the congestion window can reduce
   the FCT and therefore allow the equipment to go faster into a low-
   energy mode.  By sending the data faster, the energy cost can be
   significantly reduced.  This is a simple proof of concept, but
   protocols that allow for turning links into a low-power mode by
   transmitting the data over shorter periods could be designed for
   other types of networks beyond Wi-Fi access.  This should be done
   carefully: in the limit, a high rate of transmission over a short
   period of time may create bursts that the network would need to
   accommodate, with all attendant complications of bursty traffic.  We
   conjecture there is a sweet spot between trying to complete flows
   faster while controlling for burstiness in the network.  It is
   probably advisable to attempt to send traffic paced yet in bulk
   rather than spread out over multiple round trips.  This is an area of
   worthwhile exploration.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances:

   *  Protocol advances that allow greater control over traffic pacing
      to account for fluctuations in carbon cost, i.e., control knobs to
      "bulk up" transmission over short periods or to smoothen it out
      over longer periods.

   *  Protocol advances that allow to optimize link utilization
      according to different goals and strategies (including maximizing
      minimal link utilization vs minimizing maximal link utilization,
      etc.)

   *  Assessments of the carbon impact of such strategies.

5.3.  Data Volume Reduction

   The first category involves designing protocols in such a way that
   they reduce the volume of data that needs to be transmitted for any
   given purpose.  Loosely speaking, by reducing this volume, more
   traffic can be served by the same amount of networking
   infrastructure, hence reducing overall energy consumption.
   Possibilities here include protocols that avoid unnecessary
   retransmissions.  At the application layer, protocols may also use
   coding mechanisms that encode information close to the Shannon limit.
   Currently, most of the traffic over the Internet consists of video
   streaming and encoders for video are already quite efficient and keep
   improving all the time, resulting in energy savings as one of many
   advantages (of course being offset by increasingly higher
   resolution).  However, it is not clear that the extra work to achieve
   higher compression ratios for the payloads results in a net energy
   gain: what is saved over the network may be offset by the



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   compression/decompression effort.  Further research on this aspect is
   necessary.

   At the transport protocol layer, TCP and to some extent QUIC react to
   congestion by dropping packets.  This is a highly energy inefficient
   method to signal congestion, since the network has to wait one RTT to
   be aware that the congestion has occurred, and since the effort to
   transmit the packet from the source up until it is dropped ends up
   being wasted.  This calls for new transport protocols that react to
   congestion without dropping packets.  ECN [RFC2481] is a possible
   solution, however not widely deployed.  DC-TCP [Alizadeh2010DCTCP] is
   tuned for Data Centers, L4S is an attempt to port similar
   functionality to the Internet [RFC9330].  Qualitative Communication
   [QUAL] [Westphal2021qualitative] allows the nodes to react to
   congestion by dropping only some of the data in the packet, thereby
   only partially wasting the resource consumed by transmitted the
   packet up to this point.  Novel transport protocols for the WAN can
   ensure that no energy is wasted transmitting packets that will be
   eventually dropped.

   Another solution to reduce the bandwidth of network protocols by
   reducing their header tax, for example applying header compression.
   An example in IETF is [RFC3095].  Again, reducing protocol header
   size saves energy to forward packets, but at the cost of maintaining
   a state for compression/decompression, plus computing these
   operations.  The gain from such protocol optimization further depends
   on the application and whether it sends packets with large payloads
   close to the MTU (the header tax and any savings here are very
   limited), or whether it sends packets with very small payload size
   (making the header tax more pronounced and savings more significant).

   An alternative to reducing the amount of protocol data is to design
   routing protocols that are more efficient to process at each node.
   For instance, path based forwarding/labels such as MPLS [RFC3031]
   facilitate the next hop look-up, thereby reducing the energy
   consumption.  It is unclear if some state at router to speed up look
   up is more energy efficient that "no state + lookup" that is more
   computationally intensive.  Other methods to speed up a next-hop
   lookup include geographic routing (e.g., [Herzen2011PIE]).  Some
   network protocols could be designed to reduce the next hop look-up
   computation at a router.  It is unclear if Longest Prefix Match (LPM)
   is efficient from an energy point of view or if constitutes a
   significant energy burden for the operation of a router.








Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   Beyond the volume of data itself, another consideration is the number
   of messages and chattiness of the protocol.  Some protocols rely on
   frequent periodic updates or heartbeats, which may prevent equipment
   to go into sleep mode.  In such cases, it makes sense to explore the
   the use of feasible alternatives that rely on different communication
   patterns and fewer messages.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances in this space:

   *  Assessments of energy-related tradeoffs regarding protocol design
      space and tradeoffs, such as maintaining state versus more compact
      encodings or extra computation for transcoding operations versus
      larger data volume.

   *  Protocol advances for improving the ratio of goodput to throughput
      and to reduce waste: reduction in header tax, in protocol
      verbosity, in need for retransmissions, improvements in coding,
      etc.

   *  Protocols that allow to manage transmission patterns in ways that
      facilitate periods of link inactivity, such as burstiness and
      chattiness.

5.4.  Network Addressing

   There may be other ways to shave off energy usage from networks.  One
   example concerns network addressing.  Address tables can get very
   large, resulting in large forwarding tables that require considerable
   amount of memory, in addition to large amounts of state needing to be
   maintained and synchronized.  From an energy footprint perspective,
   both can be considered wasteful and offer opportunities for
   improvement.  At the protocol level, rethinking how addresses are
   structured can allow for flexible addressing schemes that can be
   exploited in network deployments that are less energy-intensive by
   design.  This can be complemented by supporting clever address
   allocation schemes that minimize the number of required forwarding
   entries as part of deployments.

   Alternatively, the address could be designed so as to allow for more
   efficient processing than LPM.  For instance, a geographic type of
   addressing (where the next hop is computed as a simple distance
   calculation based on the respective position of the current node, of
   its neighbors and of the destination) [Herzen2011PIE] could be
   potentially more energy-efficient.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances in this space:



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   *  Devise methods to assess the magnitude of the carbon footprint
      that is associated with addressing schemes.

   *  Devise methods to improve addressing schemes, as well as address
      assignment schemes, to minimize their footprint.

6.  Challenges and Opportunities - Network Level

6.1.  Network Optimization and Energy/Carbon/Pollution-Aware Networking

   Networks have been optimized for many years under many criteria, for
   example to optimize (maximize) network utilization and to optimize
   (minimize) cost.  Hence, it is straightforward to add optimization
   for "greenness" (including energy efficiency, power consumption,
   carbon footprint) as important criteria.

   This includes assessing the carbon footprints of paths and optimizing
   those paths so that overall footprint is minimized, then applying
   techniques such as path-aware networking or segment routing [RFC8402]
   to steer traffic along those paths.  (As mentioned earlier, other
   proxy measures could be used for carbon footprint, such as an energy-
   efficiency ratings of traversed equipment.)  It also includes aspects
   such as considering the incremental carbon footprint in routing
   decisions.  Optimizing cost has a long tradition in networking; many
   of the existing mechanisms can be leveraged for greener networking
   simply by introducing carbon footprint as a cost factor.  Low-hanging
   fruit include the inclusion of carbon-related parameters as a cost
   parameter in control planes, whether distributed (e.g., IGP) or
   conceptually centralized via SDN controllers.  Likewise, there are
   opportunities in right-placing functionality in the network.  An
   example concerns placement of virtualized network functions in
   carbon-optimized ways - for example, cohosted on fewer servers in
   close proximity to each other in order to avoid unnecessary overhead
   in long-distance control traffic.

   Other opportunities concern adding carbon-awareness to dynamic path
   selection schemes.  This is sometimes also referred to as "energy-
   aware networking" (respectively "pollution-aware networking"
   [Hossain2019] or "carbon-aware networking", when carbon footprint
   related parameters beyond pure energy consumption are taken into
   account).  Again, considerable energy savings can potentially be
   realized by taking resources offline (e.g., putting them into power-
   saving or hibernation mode) when they are not currently needed under
   current network demand and load conditions.  Therefore, weaning such
   resources from traffic becomes an important consideration for energy-
   efficient traffic steering.  This contrasts and indeed conflicts with
   existing schemes that typically aim to create redundancy and load-
   balance traffic across a network to achieve even resource



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   utilization.  This usually occurs for important reasons, such as
   making networks more resilient, optimizing service levels, and
   increasing fairness.  One of the big challenges hence concerns how
   resource weaning schemes to realize energy savings can be
   accommodated while preventing the cannibalization of other important
   goals, counteracting other established mechanisms, and avoiding
   destabilization of the network.

   An opportunity may lie in making a distinction between "energy modes"
   of different domains.  For instance, in a highly trafficked core, the
   energy challenge is to transmit the traffic efficiently.  The amount
   of traffic is relatively fluid (due to multiplexing of multiple
   sessions) and the traffic is predictable.  In this case, there is no
   need to optimize on a per session basis nor even at a short time
   scale.  In the access networks connecting to that core, though, there
   are opportunities for this fast convergence: traffic is much more
   bursty, less predictable and the network should be able to be more
   reactive.  Other domains such as DCs may have also more variable
   workloads and different traffic patterns.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances in this space:

   *  Devise methods for carbon-aware traffic steering and routing;
      treat carbon footprint as a traffic cost metric to optimize.

   *  Apply ML and AI methods to optimize networks for carbon footprint;
      assess applicability of game theoretic approaches.

   *  Articulate and, as applicable, moderate tradeoffs between carbon
      awareness and other operational goals such as robustness and
      redundancy.

   *  Extend control-plane protocols with carbon-related parameters.

   *  Consider security issues imposed by greater energy awareness, to
      minimize the new attack surfaces that would allow an adversary to
      turn off resources or to waste energy.

6.2.  Assessing Carbon Footprint and Network-Level Instrumentation

   As an important prerequisite to capture many of the opportunities
   outlined in Section 6.1, good abstractions (and corresponding
   instrumentation) that allow to easily assess energy cost and carbon
   footprint will be required.  These abstractions need to account for
   not only for the energy cost associated with packet forwarding across
   a given path, but related cost for processing, for memory, for
   maintaining of state, to result in a holistic picture.



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   Optimization of carbon footprint involves in many cases trade-offs
   that involve not only packet forwarding but also aspects such as
   keeping state, caching data, or running computations at the edge
   instead of elsewhere.  (Note: there may be a differential in running
   a computation at an edge server vs. at an hyperscale DC.  The latter
   is often better optimized than the latter.)  Likewise, other aspects
   of carbon footprint beyond mere energy-intensity should be
   considered.  For instance, some network segments may be powered by
   more sustainable energy sources than others, and some network
   equipment may be more environmentally-friendly to build, deploy and
   recycle, all of which can be reflected in abstractions to consider.

   Assessing carbon footprint at the network level requires
   instrumentation that associates that footprint not just with
   individual devices (as outline in Section 4.2 but relates it also to
   concepts that are meaningful at the network level, i.e., to flows and
   to paths.  For example, it will be useful to provide visibility into
   the carbon intensity of a path: Can the carbon cost of traffic
   transmitted over the path be aggregated?  Does the path include
   outliers, i.e., segments with equipment with a particularly poor
   carbon footprint?

   Similarly, how can the carbon cost of a flow be assessed?  That might
   serve many purposes beyond network optimization, from the option to
   introduce green billing and charging schemes to the ability to raise
   carbon awareness by end users.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances in this space:

   *  Devise methods to assess, to estimate, to predict carbon-intensity
      of paths.

   *  Devise methods to account for carbon footprint of flows and
      networking services.

6.3.  Dimensioning and Peak Shaving

   As mentioned in Section 3, the overall energy usage of a network is
   in large part determined by how the network is dimensioned,
   specifically: which and how many pieces of network equipment are
   deployed and turned on.  A significant portion of energy is drawn
   even when simply in idle state.  Minimizing the amount of equipment
   that needs to be turned on in the first place presents hence one of
   the biggest energy saving opportunities.






Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   Network deployments are generally dimensioned for periods of peak
   traffic, resulting in excess capacity during periods of non-peak
   usage that nonetheless consumes power.  Shaving peak usage may thus
   result in outsized sustainability gains, as it reduces not only
   energy usage during peak traffic, but more importantly waste during
   non-peak periods.

   While traffic volume is largely a function of demand traffic that
   network providers have little influence over, some peak shaving cand
   nevertheless be accomplished by techniques such as spreading spikes
   out over geographies (e.g. redirecting some traffic across more
   costly but less utilized routes, particular in cases when traffic
   spikes are of a more local or reginal nature) or over time (e.g.
   postponing non-urgent traffic, storing or buffering using edge clouds
   or extra storage where feasible).

   To make techniques effective, accurate learning and prediction of
   traffic patterns is required.  This includes the ability to perform
   forecasting to ensure that additional resources can be spun up in
   time should it be needed.  Clearly, this presents interesting
   challenges, yet also opportunities for technical advances to make a
   difference.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances in this space:

   *  Support for methods that allow to monitor and forecast traffic
      demand, involving new mechanisms and/or performance improvements
      of existing mechanisms to support the collection of telemetry and
      generation of traffic matrices at very high velocity and scale

   *  Additional methods that allow for even traffic load distribution
      across the network, i.e. load balancing on a network scale, and
      enablement of those methods through control protocol extensions as
      needed.

6.4.  Convergence Schemes

   One set of challenges of carbon-aware networking concerns the fact
   that many schemes result in much greater dynamicity and continuous
   change in the network as resources may be getting steered away from
   (when possible) and then leveraged again (when necessary) in rapid
   succession.  This imposes significant stress on convergence schemes
   that results in challenges to the scalability of solutions and their
   ability to perform in a fast-enough manner.  Network-wide convergence
   imposes high cost and incurs significant delay and is hence not
   susceptible to such schemes.  In order to mitigate this problem,
   mechanisms should be investigated that do not require convergence



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   beyond the vicinity of the affected network device.  Especially in
   cases where central network controllers are involved that are
   responsible for aspects such as configuration of paths and the
   positioning of network functions and that aim for global
   optimization, the impact of churn needs to be minimized.  This means
   that, for example, (re-) discovery and update schemes need to be
   simplified and extensive recalculation e.g., of routes and paths
   based on the current energy state of the network needs to be avoided.

   Challenges and opportunities for IETF-led advances in this space
   include:

   *  Protocols that facilitate rapid convergence (per Section 5.1).

   *  Investigate methods that mitigate effects of churn, including
      methods that maintain memory or state as well as methods relying
      on prediction, inference, and interpolation.

6.5.  The Role of Topology

   One of the most important network management constructs is that of
   the network topology.  A network topology can usually be represented
   as a database or as a mathematical graph, with vertices or nodes,
   edges or links, representing networking nodes, links connecting their
   interfaces, and all their characteristics.  Examples of these network
   topology representations include routing protocols link-state
   databases, and service function chaining graphs.

   As we desire to add carbon and energy awareness into networks, the
   energy proportionality of topologies directly supports sustainability
   visibility and improvements via automation.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances in this space:

   *  Embedding carbon and energy awareness into the representation of
      topologies, wheather considering IGP LSDBs (link-state databases)
      and their advertisements, BGP-LS (BGP Link-State), or metadata for
      the rendering of service function paths in a service chain.

   *  Use of those carbon-aware attributes to optimize topology as a
      whole under end-to-end energy and carbon considerations.









Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


7.  Challenges and Opportunities - Architecture Level

   Another possibility to improve network energy efficiency is to
   organize networks in a way that they can best serve important
   applications so as to minimize energy consumption.  Examples include
   retrieval of content or remote computation.  This allows to minimize
   the amount of communication that needs to take place in the first
   place, although energy savings within the network may at least in
   part be offset by additional energy consumption elsewhere.  The
   following are some examples that suggest that it may be worthwhile
   reconsidering the ways in which networks are architected to minimize
   their carbon footprint.

   For example, Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) have reduced the energy
   expenditure of the Internet by downloading content near the users.
   The content is sent only a few times over the WAN, and then is served
   locally.  This shifts the energy consumption from networking to
   storage.  Further methods can reduce the energy usage even more
   [Bianco2016energy] [Mathew2011energy] [Islam2012evaluating].  Whether
   overall energy savings are net positive depends on the actual
   deployment, but from the network operator's perspective, at least it
   shifts the energy bill away from the network to the CDN operator.

   While CDNs operate as an overlay, another architecture has been
   proposed to provide the CDN features directly in the network, namely
   Information Centric Networks [Ahlgren2012survey], studied as well in
   the IRTF ICNRG.  This however shifts the energy consumption back to
   the network operator and requires some power-hungry hardware, such as
   chips for larger name look-ups and memory for the in-network cache.
   As a result, it is unclear if there is an actual energy gain from the
   dissemination and retrieval of content within in-network caches.




















Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 25]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   Fog computing and placing intelligence at the edge are other
   architectural directions for reducing the amount of energy that is
   spent on packet forwarding and in the network.  There again, the
   trade-off is between performing computation in a an energy-optimized
   data center at very large scale, but requiring transmission of
   significant volumes of data across many nodes and long distances,
   versus performing computational tasks at the edge where the energy
   may not be used as efficiently (less multiplexing of resources, and
   smaller sites are inherently less efficient due to their smaller
   scale) but the amount of long-distance network traffic is
   significantly reduced.  Softwarization, containers, microservices are
   direct enablers for such architectures, and the deployment of
   programmable network infrastructure (as for instance Infrastructure
   Processing Units - IPUs or SmartNICs that offload some computations
   from the CPU onto the NIC) will help its realization.  However, the
   power consumption characteristics of CPUs are different from those of
   NPUs, another aspect to be considered in conjunction with
   virtualization.

   Other possibilities concern taking economic aspects into
   consideration impact, such as providing incentives to users of
   networking services in order to minimize energy consumption and
   emission impact.  An example for this is given in
   [Wolf2014choicenet], which could be expanded to include energy
   incentives.

   Other approaches consider performing a late binding of data and
   functions to be performed on the data [Krol2017NFaaS].  The COIN
   Research Group in IRTF focuses on similar issues.  Jointly optimizing
   for the total energy cost, taking into account networking and
   computing (and the different energy cost of computing in an
   hyperscale DC vs an edge node) is still an area of open research.

   In summary, rethinking of the overall network (and networked
   application) architecture can be an opportunity to significantly
   reduce the energy cost at the network layer, for example by
   performing tasks that involve massive communications closer to the
   user.  To what extend these shifts result in a net reduction of
   carbon footprint is an important question that requires further
   analysis on a case-by-case basis.

   The following summarizes some challenges and opportunities that can
   provide the basis for IETF-led advances in this space:








Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 26]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   *  Investigate organization of networking architecture for important
      classes of applications (examples: content delivery, right-placing
      of computational intelligence, industrial operations and control,
      massively distributed machine learning and AI) to optimize green
      foot print and holistic approaches to trade off carbon footprint
      between forwarding, storage, and computation.

   *  Models to assess and compare alternatives in providing networked
      services, e.g., assess carbon impact relative to alternatives
      where as to where to perform compute, what information to cache,
      and what communication exchanges to conduct.

8.  Conclusions

   How to make networks "greener" and reduce their carbon footprint is
   an important problem for the networking industry to address, both for
   societal and for economic reasons.  This document has highlighted a
   number of the technical challenges and opportunities in that regard.

   Of those, perhaps the key challenge to address right away concerns
   the ability to expose at a fine granularity the energy impact of any
   networking actions.  Providing visibility into this will enable many
   approaches to come towards a solution.  It will be key to
   implementing optimization via control loops that allow to assess the
   energy impact of decision taken.  It will also help to answer
   questions such as: is caching - with the associated storage energy -
   better than retransmitting from a different server - with the
   associated networking cost?  Is compression more energy-efficient
   once factoring the computation cost of compression vs transmitting
   uncompressed data?  Which compression scheme is more energy
   efficient?  Is energy saving of computing at an efficient hyperscale
   DC compensated by the networking cost to reach that DC?  Is the
   overhead of gathering and transmitting fine-grained energy telemetry
   data offset by the total energy gain by ways of better decisions that
   this data enables?  Is transmitting data to a Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
   satellite constellation compensated by the fact that once in the
   constellation, the networking is fueled on solar energy?  Is the
   energy cost of sending rockets to place routers in Low Earth Orbit
   amortized over time?

   Determining where the sweet spots are and optimizing networks along
   those lines will be a key towards making networks "greener".  We
   expect to see significant advances across these areas and believe
   that IETF has an important role to play in facilitating this.







Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 27]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not have any IANA requests.

10.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations may appear to be orthogonal to green
   networking considerations.  However, there are a number of important
   caveats.

   Security vulnerabilities of networks may manifest themselves in
   compromised energy efficiency.  For example, attackers could aim at
   increasing energy consumption in order to drive up attack victims'
   energy bill.  Specific vulnerabilities will depend on the particular
   mechanisms.  For example, in the case of monitoring energy
   consumption data, tampering with such data might result in
   compromised energy optimization control loops.  Hence any mechanisms
   to instrument and monitor the network for such data need to be
   properly secured to ensure authenticity.

   In some cases, there are inherent tradeoffs between security and
   maximal energy efficiency that might otherwise be achieved.  An
   example is encryption, which requires additional computation for
   encryption and decryption activities and security handshakes, in
   addition to the need to send more traffic than necessitated by the
   entropy of the actual data stream.  Likewise, mechanisms that allow
   to turn resources on or off could become a target for attackers.

   Energy consumption can be used to create covert channels, which is a
   security risk for information leakage.  For instance, the temperature
   of an element can be used to create a Thermal Covert Channel [TCC],
   or the reading/sharing of the measured energy consumption can be
   abused to create a covert channel (see for instance [DRAM] or
   [NewClass]).  Power information may be used to create side-channel
   attacks.  For instance, [SideChannel] provides a review of 20 years
   of study on this topic.  Any new parameters to consider in protocol
   designs or in measurements is susceptible to create such covert or
   side channel and this should be taken into account while designing
   energy efficient protocols.

11.  Contributors

      Michael Welzl, University of Oslo, michawe@ifi.uio.no








Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 28]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


12.  Acknowledgments

   We thank Dave Oran for providing the information regarding covert
   channels using energy measurements.  Additional acknowledgments will
   be added at a later stage.

13.  Informative References

   [Ahlgren2012survey]
              Ahlgren, B., Dannewitz, C., Imbrenda, C., Kutscher, D.,
              and B. Ohlman, "A survey of information-centric
              networking", IEEE Communications Magazine Vol.50 No.7,
              2012.

   [Alizadeh2010DCTCP]
              Alizadeh, M., Greenberg, A., Maltz, D., Padhye, J., Patel,
              P., Prabhakar, B., Sengupta, S., and M. Sridharan, "Data
              Center TCP (DCTCP)", ACM SIGCOMM pp.63-74, 2010.

   [Bianco2016energy]
              Bianco, A., Mashayekhi, R., and M. Meo, "Energy
              consumption for data distribution in content delivery
              networks", IEEE International Conference on Communications
              (ICC) pp.1-6, 2016.

   [Bolla2011energy]
              Bolla, R., Bruschi, R., Davoli, F., and F. Cucchietti,
              "Energy Efficiency in the Future Internet: A Survey of
              Existing Approaches and Trends in Energy-Aware Fixed
              Network Infrastructures", IEEE Communications Surveys and
              Tutorials Vol.13 No.2, pp.223-244, 2011.

   [Cervero19]
              Cervero, A. G., Chincoli, M., Dittmann, L., Fischer, A.,
              and A. Garcia, "Green Wired Networks", Wiley Journal on
              Large-Scale Distributed Systems and Energy
              Efficiency pp.41-80, 2019.

   [Chabarek08]
              Chabarek, J., Sommers, J., Barford, P., Tsiang, D., and S.
              Wright, "Power awareness in network design and routing",
              IEEE Infocom pp.457-465, 2008.

   [DRAM]     Paiva, T. B., Navaridas, J., and R. Terada, "Robust Covert
              Channels Based on DRAM Power Consumption", In book:
              Information Security (pp.319-338) , 2019.





Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 29]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   [Emergy]   Raghavan, B. and J. Ma, "The Energy and Emergy of the
              Internet", ACM HotNets , 2011.

   [Framework]
              Faber, G., "A framework to estimate emissions from virtual
              conferences", International Journal of Environmental
              Studies, 78:4, 608-623 , 2021.

   [GreenNet22]
              Clemm, A. and C. Westphal, "Challenges and Opportunities
              in Green Networking", 1st International Workshop on
              Network Energy Efficiency in the Softwarization Era IEEE
              NetSoft 2022, June 2022.

   [Herzen2011PIE]
              Herzen, J., Westphal, C., and P. Thiran, "Scalable routing
              easy as PIE: A practical isometric embedding protocol",
              19th IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols
              (ICNP) pp.49-58, 2011.

   [Hossain2019]
              Hossain, M., Georges, J., Rondeau, E., and T. Divoux,
              "Energy, Carbon and Renewable Energy: Candidate Metrics
              for Green-Aware Routing?", DOI 10.3390/s19132901,
              Sensors Vol. 19 No. 3, June 2019,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6779082>.

   [I-D.cx-opsawg-green-metrics]
              Clemm, A., Dong, L., Mirsky, G., Ciavaglia, L., Tantsura,
              J., Odini, M., Schooler, E., Rezaki, A., and C. Pignataro,
              "Green Networking Metrics", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-cx-opsawg-green-metrics-01, 15 December 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-cx-opsawg-
              green-metrics-01>.

   [IETF-Net0]
              Daley, J., "Towards a net zero IETF", IETF News , 6 May
              2022,
              <https://www.ietf.org/blog/towards-a-net-zero-ietf/>.

   [Islam2012evaluating]
              Islam, S. U. and J. Pierson, "Evaluating Energy
              Consumption in CDN Servers", Proceedings of the Second
              International Conference on ICT as Key Technology against
              Global Warming pp.64-78, 2012.






Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 30]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   [Junkyard] Switzer, J., Kastner, R., and P. Pannuto, "Architecture of
              a Junkyard Datacenter", arXiv:2110.06870v1, October 2021 ,
              2021.

   [Krol2017NFaaS]
              Krol, M. and I. Psaras, "NFaaS: Named Function as a
              Service", ACM SIGCOMM ICN Conference , 2017.

   [Mathew2011energy]
              Mathew, V., Sitaraman, R., and P. Shenoy, "Energy-Aware
              Load Balancing in Content Delivery Networks", CoRR
              http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.5641 , 2011.

   [NewClass] Khatamifard, S. K., Wang, L., Kose, S., and U. R.
              Karpuzcu, "A New Class of Covert Channels Exploiting Power
              Management Vulnerabilities", IEEE Computer Architecture
              Letters , 2018.

   [QUAL]     Li, R., Makhijani, K., Yousefi, H., Westphal, C., Xong,
              L., Wauters, T., and F. D. Turck, "A Framework for
              Qualitative Communications using Big Packet Protocol",
              Proceedings ACM Sigcomm Workshop On Networking For
              Emerging Applications And Technologies pp.22-28, 2019.

   [Ren2018jordan]
              Ren, J., Ren, K., Westphal, C., Wang, J., Wang, J., Song,
              T., Liu, S., and J. Wang, "JORDAN: A Novel Traffic
              Engineering Algorithm for Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over
              HTTP", IEEE International Conference on Computing,
              Networking and Communications (ICNC) pp.581-587, 2018.

   [RFC2481]  Ramakrishnan, K. and S. Floyd, "A Proposal to add Explicit
              Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP", RFC 2481,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2481, January 1999,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2481>.

   [RFC3031]  Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and R. Callon, "Multiprotocol
              Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3031, January 2001,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3031>.

   [RFC3095]  Bormann, C., Burmeister, C., Degermark, M., Fukushima, H.,
              Hannu, H., Jonsson, L., Hakenberg, R., Koren, T., Le, K.,
              Liu, Z., Martensson, A., Miyazaki, A., Svanbro, K.,
              Wiebke, T., Yoshimura, T., and H. Zheng, "RObust Header
              Compression (ROHC): Framework and four profiles: RTP, UDP,
              ESP, and uncompressed", RFC 3095, DOI 10.17487/RFC3095,
              July 2001, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3095>.



Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 31]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   [RFC7950]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language",
              RFC 7950, DOI 10.17487/RFC7950, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7950>.

   [RFC8402]  Filsfils, C., Ed., Previdi, S., Ed., Ginsberg, L.,
              Decraene, B., Litkowski, S., and R. Shakir, "Segment
              Routing Architecture", RFC 8402, DOI 10.17487/RFC8402,
              July 2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8402>.

   [RFC9330]  Briscoe, B., Ed., De Schepper, K., Bagnulo, M., and G.
              White, "Low Latency, Low Loss, and Scalable Throughput
              (L4S) Internet Service: Architecture", RFC 9330,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9330, January 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9330>.

   [SideChannel]
              Randolph, M. and W. Diehl, "Power Side-Channel Attack
              Analysis: A Review of 20 Years of Study for the Layman",
              Cryptography 2020, 4, 15 , 2020.

   [TCC]      Rahimi, P., Singh, A. K., and X. Wang, "Selective Noise
              Based Power Efficient and Effective Countermeasure Against
              Thermal Covert Channel Attacks in Multi-Core Systems",
              Journal on Low Power Electronics and Applications , 2022.

   [Telefonica2021]
              Telefonica, "Telefonica Consolidated Annual Report 2021.",
              2021.

   [TradeOff] Welzl, M., "Not a Trade-Off: On the Wi-Fi Energy
              Efficiency of Effective Internet Congestion Control",
              IEEE/IFIP WONS , 2022.

   [Westphal2021qualitative]
              Westphal, C., He, D., Makhijani, K., and R. Li,
              "Qualitative Communications for Augmented Reality and
              Virtual Reality", 22nd IEEE International Conference on
              High Performance Switching and Routing (HPSR) pp.1-6,
              2021.

   [Wolf2014choicenet]
              Tilman, W., Griffioen, J., Calvert, L., Dutta, R.,
              Rouskas, G., Baldin, I., and A. Nagurney, "ChoiceNet:
              Toward an Economy Plane for the Internet", SIGCOMM
              Computer Communciations Review Vol.44 No.3, July 2014.

Authors' Addresses




Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 32]

Internet-Draft       Management for Green Networking       December 2023


   Alexander Clemm (editor)
   Futurewei
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara,  CA 95050
   United States of America
   Email: ludwig@clemm.org


   Cedric Westphal
   Futurewei
   Email: cedric.westphal@futurewei.com


   Jeff Tantsura
   Nvidia
   Email: jefftant.ietf@gmail.com


   Laurent Ciavaglia
   Nokia
   Email: laurent.ciavaglia@nokia.com


   Carlos Pignataro (editor)
   North Carolina State University
   United States of America
   Email: cpignata@gmail.com, cmpignat@ncsu.edu


   Marie-Paule Odini
   Email: mp.odini@orange.fr




















Clemm, et al.              Expires 2 July 2024                 [Page 33]
